[Music]
have you ever found yourself relaxing in
the tub thinking hmm
how could i design my own cpu
okay maybe that's not quite as likely
but let's say you work for a large
company that is legitimately looking to
do something like that where do you even
start
i mean
i guess
could you license intellectual property
from intel or arm
i mean maybe but that kind of thing is
going to cost you an
arm and a leg
so then what other options are out there
well when we asked just that question to
krista asanovich co-creator of risk five
he was quick to bring over actually like
a team of people and one of these
computers based on risk 5's free
and open architecture which surprisingly
functions
like a normal pc
and i cannot wait to tell you guys about
this thing
[Music]
so there's a good chance that right now
you're thinking okay
cool tech demo quake 2. but
i'm not going to have one of these open
processors in my computer anytime soon
so
why should i care
well you should care because you
actually
can expect to find risk 5 processors in
your gaming rig
much sooner than you'd think just
for the time being not as your primary
central processing unit so nvidia and
western digital along with around 100
other companies will soon be shipping
products with risc-5 microprocessors on
board due to it having better efficiency
better security and that sweet sweet
royalty-free license to boot
in order to appreciate how cool risk 5
actually is though we do need a bit of a
history lesson
so back in the 1960s ram was made using
tiny magnetic cores and these were super
duper slow compared to the vacuum tube
processors of the time
so to make sure that the processor
wasn't just wasting cycles while the ram
was catching up
every instruction from the memory ran a
little program hardwired inside the
processor called microcode with the 70s
came the space race where scientists
figured out how to put a lot of
transistors on one chip which meant that
now fast memory could be put on the same
chip as the cpu
so then microcode just got
thrown in the garbage bin of history
right
no just kidding a lot of that same
microcode from way back then actually
still exists in modern computers for
software backwards compatibility
the legendary intel 8086 cpu pioneered a
new computer architecture x86
but
you could make the argument that it was
just hastily thrown together by intel
engineers in just a few weeks and they
they had no way of knowing that it was
going to become the de facto home
computer architecture for decades to
come
thanks to its use in the original ibm pc
but with an average of one instruction
being added every couple of weeks since
its inception
x86 has gone from poorly thought out to
today ballooning to over
1500 instructions i mean think of it
like the english language how many words
do you use on a daily basis versus how
many are in the dictionary in a modern
world this kind of bloat leads to
inefficiency not to mention needless
difficulty for anyone that wants to make
a processor so
why is everyone still on x86 well
software support is a big part since
porting windows and all of its programs
to a new architecture has proven
we could use a word like inconvenient i
mean look at windows rt on arm
total flop
on top of that creating a good
architecture in the first place is
freaking hard to be clear those guys
that threw it together were pretty
talented they were pretty talented team
and it's been a lot easier over the last
several decades to just make the
transistor smaller and pack in more of
them
at least it was easier until moore's law
kind of petered out and huge leaps
forward in cpu speeds
basically stopped in the last five or so
years
so clearly a more usable alternative to
x86 or arm was needed one that was
created with modern processors in mind
and using the power of hindsight
that other architectures didn't get to
benefit from which is where krista and
his team come in creating the reduced
instruction set computing five or
risk 5. the core of which has less than
50 instructions instead of 1500ish there
will probably be more by the time this
video is out now those 50 instructions
are locked down and won't be changing in
the future so ideally a program made
60 years from now using risk five
should work just fine on processors
being made today i mean
slowly though
but what if those 50 instructions aren't
enough
well risk five is customizable meaning
that if say
nvidia wants to create a processor that
is specialized for ai and graphics they
could actually add extra instructions
for their task allowing for greater
hardware specialization and much greater
efficiency
but of course there have been open
source instruction sets before and they
have never taken off
so
back to that question
why do we care about this one well the
members list for the risk five
foundation is kind of a who's who of the
biggest tech companies including but not
limited to google samsung nvidia tesla
ibm and a hundred or so more including a
startup founded by the creators of risk
five
sci five to help kick start risk five
adoption and to avoid that chicken and
egg problem with hardware and software
by creating the world's first commercial
risk 5 silicon
so this right here is the fu540
which stands for freedom unleashed 540
definitely not
what else fu could mean
towards lock down standards so so this
one thousand dollar processor is well
not particularly fast with four cores
that on this particular board can clock
up to 1.6 gigahertz on a 28 nanometer
process node
but breaking speed records is not
exactly the point when this processor
was announced with support for linux
back in february you could run pretty
much
nothing on it
but here we are just six months later
and 80 of the debian software library
has been compiled for risk five meaning
that all you need to install almost any
app is a quick app get command
but of course the point of this board
isn't for you to run games on it even if
it does run quake 2
thanks to this configuration
so we've got the
processor here which sits under this
tiny little heat sink and fan then we've
got the ram so that's eight gigs of ddr4
with ecc we've got gigabit ethernet
right here we've got usb and uh let's
see yeah we've got a micro sd card
reader right here
but what makes it unique
is this chip connector right here
this allows for you to connect the cpu
to
well
anything you'd like so
currently on the table in front of me
here we've got another unit that's
connected to an fpga that handles pci
express lanes for what you could kind of
consider a a larger scale motherboard
here so now we've got a graphics card
this is just a regular hd 6450 amd
graphics card we've got a samsung m.2
drive on the other side plus
we've got a bunch more i o
but you know what else you could connect
here
pretty much anything
this allows companies to build whatever
custom solution they would like onto the
sci-5 processor board so the tldr is
that it can interface with whatever fpga
or custom silicon is needed while
getting the advantages of the risc-5
instruction set linux support and also
all of the intellectual property and
legal work that sci-fi has already put
in to make sure that things like
the ram work with the cpu
so in the future sci-fi is looking to
have sort of a domino's pizza approach
to custom chips where a company can come
in and add on bits for say image
processing or autonomous car ai but now
you're probably wondering
why have it open source then if sci-5 is
sinking all this time into making these
custom chips work
and into the risk 5 instruction set
why not lock it down so they can keep
all the money
well say that a company has a driver
issue normally they would have to go to
intel or whoever to get it fixed causing
a lot of work on both sides and
potentially making the company have to
disclose what exactly they're working on
whereas when the software and the
hardware is open source the company can
just fix the bug and then upload a fix
for the community afterwards the open
source nature is also appealing to
companies because if they invest in
developing for risk five and sci five
goes under
then all of those man hours don't get
wasted
what's going to cause the real stiction
of risk five though is in education
because it's royalty free the most
popular computer architecture textbooks
being published right now and courses
being taught in undergrad and graduate
programs around the world
use risk 5 to show students how computer
hardware works on a very low level
previously some
fantasy architecture would have to be
used and then when a computer engineer
would enter the field they'd finally get
to work with a messy proprietary isa
so since very few students will switch
up what architecture they use once
entering the field the idea here is that
you can expect a lot more custom
hardware being made using risk 5 in the
future in your hard drives in your
graphics cards in your cars
and maybe
maybe someday even as the primary
architecture of your home computer
and you'd be running games more complex
than quake 2 by that time so thanks for
watching guys if this video sucked
um hi amd and intel
and arm i guess hi guys uh but if you
liked it get subscribed hit the like
button or check out the link to where we
where to buy the stuff we featured yeah
i guess leveling i guess you could buy
one if you really want to in the video
description also linked in the
description is our merch store which has
cool shirts like this one and our
community forum which you should totally
join